Recently, I've been looking into contributing more and more code to open source projects on [Github](http://github.com/pkillian) as a way of learning more, giving back to the community, and creating a name for myself. In this pursuit, I stumbled across a few amazing projects to which I'll hopefully contribute a hefty amount of work. All that aside, stumbling across [AngularJS's Contributing Guidelines](https://github.com/angular/angular.js/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#commit-message-format) may be the most game changing thing I've seen in my open-source pursuit.

Now, before you scoff at the "groundbreaking" mention of a `CONTRIBUTING.md` file, hear me out. The companies I've been fortunate enough to work for have all had the greatest of intentions. At the start of a project, cleanliness has always been a point of emphasis. Usually, however, that cleanliness doesn't persist forever. A few weeks/months/years into a project, the code friendliness decays past a point of maintenance and becomes a burden on the developers. If you've been unfortunate enough to encounter this decay and need an alternative to keep you sane, AngularJS's guidelines for commits may be just what you're looking for.<end/>

By maintaining a strict set of rules that govern your team's version control strategies, productivity will no longer be wasted on finding sane versions to roll back to. Those wasted hours could've been better spent instead of staring at one line commit logs that resemble this:
```
Author: Patrick Killian <pkillian@berkeley.edu>
Date:   Fri Jan 09 10:15:10 2014 -0500
    fixing bug in Controllers.js
```
While declaring a bug as 'fixed' is great, it certainly doesn't give a whole lot of insight into what went on. Would you remember what bug you fixed tomorrow? How about next week? Next month? What if you created another bug that doesn't pop up for a year? You're going to repeat yourself and work over the same paces you originally did to solve it the first time! As a DRY advocate, just thinking about that makes me shiver. A much more descriptive formula, as outlined by the AngularJS project, is as follows;
```
<type>(<scope>): <subject>
<BLANK LINE>
<body>
<BLANK LINE>
<footer>
```
- __Type__: One of the following; feat (feature), fix, docs, style, refactor, test, or chore (maintain)
- __Scope__: Anything specific about the location of change; a class name, method name, etc.
- __Subject__: A brief subject line / summary
- __Body__: In depth description / list of all changes
- __Footer__: Conclusions and final remarks

Now, I don't highlight these guidelines because my commits are flawless. I'll be the first to admit my commit history is a bit reckless; plenty of my personal projects have one liners that aren't very helpful (I pulled the above commit from a project of my own). Admitting you have a problem is always the first step, and I believe setting up incentives to fix it is a great second step. I'll outline a few things here that make the extra 2-3 minutes writing these commit messages worthwhile.

# History is Sanely Browsable

Following the progression of commits is usually a painful endeavor to say the least. The usual workflow starts off a little something like this:
1. Pick a starting point, and look over the commit summary
2. Not enough information? Look into the diff
3. Spend gobs of time trying to grok what used to be, and what is now
4. Go to the next commit and repeat

Without a hard set of guidelines, nothing depicts how large or small a commit can be. That means the above rabbit-hole situation could escalate into hours of work rather easily. But with the described guideline above, there's a fairly straight forward and sane way of understanding the history. Just reading the commits should prove more than informative enough to mentally trail back a few days or even weeks of changes. After all, this is the reason we all started using VCS in the first place, right?

# Simplifies Collaboration

While history is a big reason VCS is important, easy collaboration is just as crucial. This scheme of contributing makes emphasizes a more sustainable way of collaboration as well. Because these commits ask for a type, scope and detailed body, it's more natural to have smaller commits that affect less code. Less impact per commit makes it easier to commit and be effective.

Imagine the horror of contributing to a project where wide sweeping changes across dozens files, all described with a simple message like `Made callbacks faster` is common place. I know I'd be discouraged before I could even fire up my IDE, and I'm sure many others would be as well. If we can break away from this paradigm for good, we'll undoubtedly have a much more open community that will be more focused on quality over quantity.

# Generate Changelogs Programmatically

Most projects track milestones, update a page of the most recent changes to the app, and make these changes easily viewable. If you've ever compiled one of these pages / lists by hand, you know how tedious and obnoxious it can be. With a common, clear cut way of logging your commits, it's extremely simple to programmatically generate these changelogs at the time of deploy. Thanks mostly to the `<type>` designation in the guideline, a simple call to `git log` can be easily `grep`ed and parsed into whatever format you'd like. Maybe your changelog is split into three sections including bugfixes, new features, and breaking changes. Wouldn't you know; we've got a summary on the same line as our `<type>`. Just grab the summary from that line, and throw it right into `CHANGELOG.md`.

# Conclusions

For some of us, this post may be a no-brainer. You've been fortunate enough to work on a project that was organized and stayed organized from the beginning. A lot of the projects I've contributed to at work have codebases that are older than I am, and a history of commits going back into the early nineties. While that much history is a wealth of knowledge, it's also a burden when the organization of it has deteriorated beyond repair. When your annual code cleanup comes around in the spring, consider taking a more aggressive stance on your commits. The code may be the most important part of our jobs, but the history is what we really leave our mark on most.
